---
layout: post
name:  "Building Privacy-Protecting Infrastructure"
title:  "Building Privacy-Protecting Infrastructure"
date:   2022-10-04 12:00:00
author: oskarth
published: true
permalink: /building-privacy-protecting-infrastructure
categories: research
summary: What is privacy-protecting infrastructure? Why do we need it and how we can build it? We'll look at Waku, the communication layer for Web3. We'll see how it uses ZKPs to incentivize and protect the Waku network. We'll also look at Zerokit, a library that makes it easier to use ZKPs in different environments. After reading this, I hope you'll better understand the importance of privacy-protecting infrastructure and how we can build it.
image: /img/building_private_infra_intro.png
discuss: https://forum.vac.dev/t/discussion-building-privacy-protecting-infrastructure/161
---

*This write-up is based on a talk given at DevCon 6 in Bogota, a video can be found [here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CW1DYJifdhs)*

### Intro

In this write-up, we are going to talk about building privacy-protecting
infrastructure.  What is it, why do we need it and how can we build it?

We'll look at Waku, the communication layer for Web3. We'll look at how we are
using Zero Knowledge (ZK) technology to incentivize and protect the Waku
network. We'll also look at Zerokit, a library we are writing to make ZKP easier
to use in different environments.

At the end of this write-up, I hope you'll come away with an understanding of
the importance of privacy-protecting infrastructure and how we can build it.

### About

First, briefly about Vac. We build public good protocols for the decentralized
web, with a focus on privacy and communication. We do applied research based on
which we build protocols, libraries and publications. We are also the custodians
of protocols that reflect a set of principles.

![Principles](/img/building_private_infra_principles.png)

It has its origins in the [Status app](https://status.im/) and trying to improve
the underlying protocols and infrastructure. We build [Waku](https://waku.org/),
among other things.

### Why build privacy-protecting infrastructure?

Privacy is the power to selectively reveal yourself. It is a requirement for
freedom and self-determination.

Just like you need decentralization in order to get censorship-resistance, you
need privacy to enable freedom of expression.

To build applications that are decentralized and privacy-protecting, you need
the base layer, the infrastructure itself, to have those properties.

We see this a lot. It is easier to make trade-offs at the application layer than
doing them at the base layer. You can build custodial solutions on top of a
decentralized and non-custodial network where participants control their own
keys, but you can't do the opposite.

If you think about it, buildings can be seen as a form of privacy-protecting
infrastructure. It is completely normal and obvious in many ways, but when it
comes to the digital realm our mental models and way of speaking about it hasn't
caught up yet for most people.

I'm not going too much more into the need for privacy or what happens when you
don't have it, but suffice to say it is an important property for any open
society.

When we have conversations, true peer-to-peer offline conversations, we can talk
privately. If we use cash to buy things we can do commerce privately.

On the Internet, great as it is, there are a lot of forces that makes this
natural state of things not the default. Big Tech has turned users into a
commodity, a product, and monetized user's attention for advertising. To
optimize for your attention they need to surveil your habits and activities, and
hence breach your privacy. As opposed to more old-fashioned models, where
someone is buying a useful service from a company and the incentives are more
aligned.

We need to build credibly neutral infrastructure that protects your privacy at
the base layer, in order to truly enable applications that are
censorship-resistant and encourage meaningful freedom of expression.

### Web3 infrastructure

Infrastructure is what lies underneath. Many ways of looking at this but I'll
keep it simple as per the original Web3 vision. You had Ethereum for
compute/consensus, Swarm for storage, and Whisper for messaging. Waku has taken
over the mantle from Whisper and is a lot more
[usable](https://vac.dev/fixing-whisper-with-waku) today than Whisper ever was,
for many reasons.

![Web3 Infrastructure](/img/web3_holy_trinity.png)

On the privacy-front, we see how Ethereum is struggling. It is a big UX problem,
especially when you try to add privacy back "on top". It takes a lot of effort
and it is easier to censor. We see this with recent action around Tornado Cash.
Compare this with something like Zcash or Monero, where privacy is there by
default.

There are also problems when it comes to the p2p networking side of things, for
example with Ethereum validator privacy and hostile actors and jurisdictions. If
someone can easily find out where a certain validator is physically located,
that's a problem in many parts of the world. Being able to have stronger
privacy-protection guarantees would be very useful for high-value targets.

This doesn't begin to touch on the so called "dapps" that make a lot of
sacrifices in how they function, from the way domains work, to how websites are
hosted and the reliance on centralized services for communication. We see this
time and time again, where centralized, single points of failure systems work
for a while, but then eventually fail.

In many cases an individual user might not care enough though, and for platforms
the lure to take shortcuts is strong. That is why it is important to be
principled, but also pragmatic in terms of the trade-offs that you allow on top.
We'll touch more on this in the design goals around modularity that Waku has.

### ZK for privacy-protecting infrastructure

ZKPs are a wonderful new tool. Just like smart contracts enables programmable
money, ZKPs allow us to express fundamentally new things. In line with the great
tradition of trust-minimization, we can prove statement while revealing the
absolute minimum information necessary. This fits the definition of privacy, the
power to selectively reveal yourself, perfectly. I'm sure I don't need to tell
anyone reading this but this is truly revolutionary. The technology is advancing
extremely fast and often it is our imagination that is the limit.

![Zero knowledge](/img/building_private_infra_zk.png)

### Waku

What is Waku? It is a set of modular protocols for p2p communication. It has a
focus on privacy, security and being able to run anywhere. It is the spiritual
success to Whisper.

By modular we mean that you can pick and choose protocols and how you use them
depending on constraints and trade-offs. For example, bandwidth usage vs
privacy.

It is designed to work in resource restricted environments, such as mobile
phones and in web browsers. It is important that infrastructure meets users
where they are and supports their real-world use cases. Just like you don't need
your own army and a castle to have your own private bathroom, you shouldn't need
to have a powerful always-on node to get reasonable privacy and
censorship-resistance. We might call this self-sovereignty.

### Waku - adaptive nodes

One way of looking at Waku is as an open service network. There are nodes with
varying degrees of capabilities and requirements. For example when it comes to
bandwidth usage, storage, uptime, privacy requirements, latency requirements,
and connectivity restrictions.

We have a concept of adaptive nodes that can run a variety of protocols. A node
operator can choose which protocols they want to run. Naturally, there'll be
some nodes that do more consumption and other nodes that do more provisioning.
This gives rise to the idea of a service network, where services are provided
for and consumed.

![Adaptive Nodes](/img/building_private_infra_adaptive.png)

### Waku - protocol interactions 

There are many protocols that interact. Waku Relay protocol is based on libp2p
GossipSub for p2p messaging. We have filter for bandwidth-restricted nodes to
only receive subset of messages. Lightpush for nodes with short connection
windows to push messages into network. Store for nodes that want to retrieve
historical messages.

On the payload layer, we provide support for Noise handshakes/key-exchanges.
This means that as a developers, you can get end-to-end encryption and expected
guarantees out of the box. We have support for setting up a secure channel from
scratch, and all of this paves the way for providing Signal's Double Ratchet at
the protocol level much easier. We also have experimental support for
multi-device usage. Similar features have existed in for example the Status app
for a while, but with this we make it easier for any platform using Waku to use
it.

There are other protocols too, related to peer discovery, topic usage, etc. See
[specs](https://rfc.vac.dev/) for more details.

![Protocol Interactions](/img/building_private_infra_interactions.png)

### Waku - Network

For the Waku network, there are a few problems. For example, when it comes to
network spam and incentivizing service nodes. We want to address these while
keeping privacy-guarantees of the base layer. I'm going to go into both of
these.

The spam problem arises on the gossip layer when anyone can overwhelm the
network with messages. The service incentivization is a problem when nodes don't
directly benefit from the provisioning of a certain service. This can happen if
they are not using the protocol directly themselves as part of normal operation,
or if they aren't socially inclined to provide a certain service. This depends a
lot on how an individual platform decides to use the network.

![Waku Network](/img/building_private_infra_network.png)

### Dealing with network spam and RLN Relay

Since the p2p relay network is open to anyone, there is a problem with spam. If
we look at existing solutions for dealing with spam in traditional messaging
systems, a lot of entities like Google, Facebook, Twitter, Telegram, Discord use
phone number verification. While this is largely sybil-resistant, it is
centralized and not private at all.

Historically, Whisper used PoW which isn't good for heterogenerous networks.
Peer scoring is open to sybil attacks and doesn't directly address spam
protection in an anonymous p2p network.

The key idea here is to use RLN for private economic spam protection using
zkSNARKs.

I'm not going to go into too much detail of RLN here. If you are interested, I
gave a [talk](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=g41nHQ0mLoA) in Amsterdam at
Devconnect about this. We have some write-ups on RLN
[here](https://vac.dev/rln-relay) by Sanaz who has been pushing a lot of this
from our side. There's also another talk at Devcon by Taylor going into RLN in
more detail. Finally, here's the [RLN spec](https://rfc.vac.dev/spec/32/).

I'll briefly go over what it is, the interface and circuit and then talk about
how it is used in Waku.

### RLN - Overview and Flow

RLN stands for Rate Limiting Nullifier. It is an anonyomous rate limiting
mechanism based on zkSNARKs. By rate limiting we mean you can only send N
messages in a given period. By anonymity we mean that you can't link message to
a publisher. We can think of it as a voting booth, where you are only allowed to
vote once every election.

![Voting Booth](/img/building_private_infra_vote.png)

It can be used for spam protection in p2p messaging systems, and also rate
limiting in general, such as for a decentralized captcha.

There are three parts to it. You register somewhere, then you can signal and
finally there's a verification/slashing phase. You put some capital at risk,
either economic or social, and if you double signal you get slashed.

### RLN - Circuit

Here's what the private and public inputs to the circuit look like. The identity
secret is generated locally, and we create an identity commitment that is
inserted into a Merkle tree. We then use Merkle proofs to prove membership.
Registered member can only signal once for a given epoch or external nullifier,
for example every ten seconds in Unix time. RLN identifer is for a specific RLN
app.

We also see what the circuit output looks like. This is calculated locally. `y`
is a share of the secret equation, and the (internal) nullifier acts as a unique
fingerprint for a given app/user/epoch combination. How do we calculate `y` and
the internal nullifier?

```circom
// Private input
signal input identity_secret;
signal input path_elements[n_levels][1];
signal input identity_path_index[n_levels];

// Public input
signal input x; // signal_hash
signal input epoch; // external_nullifier
signal input rln_identifier;

// Circuit output
signal output y;
signal output root;
signal output nullifier;
```

<!-- ![Circuit](/img/building_private_infra_circuit.png) -->

### RLN - Shamir's secret sharing

This is done using [Shamir's secret
sharing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shamir%27s_Secret_Sharing). Shamir’s
secret sharing is based on idea of splitting a secret into shares. This is how
we enable slashing of funds.

In this case, we have two shares. If a given identity `a0` signals twice in
epoch/external nullifier, `a1` is the same. For a given RLN app,
`internal_nullifier` then stays the same. `x` is signal hash which is different,
and `y` is public, so we can reconstruct `identity_secret`. With the identity
secret revealed, this gives access to e.g. financial stake.

```
a_0 = identity_secret // secret S
a_1 = poseidonHash([a0, external_nullifier])

y = a_0 + x * a_1

internal_nullifier = poseidonHash([a_1, rln_identifier])
```

![Shamir's secret sharing](/img/building_private_infra_shamir.png)

### RLN Relay

This is how RLN is used with Relay/GossipSub protocol. A node registers and
locks up funds, and after that it can send messages. It publishes a message
containing the Zero Knowledge proof and some other details.

Each relayer node listens to the membership contract for new members, and it
also keeps track of relevant metadata and merkle tree. Metadata is needed to be
able to detect double signaling and perform slashing.

Before forwarding a message, it does some verification checks to ensure there
are no duplicate messages, ZKP is valid and no double signaling has occured.  It
is worth noting that this can be combined with peer scoring, for example for
duplicate messages or invalid ZK proofs.

In line of Waku's goals of modularity, RLN Relay is applied on a specific subset
of pubsub and content topics. You can think of it as an extra secure channel.

![RLN Relay](/img/building_private_infra_rlnrelay.png)

### RLN Relay cross-client testnet

Where are we with RLN Relay deployment? We've recently launched our second
testnet. This is using RLN Relay with a smart contract on Goerli. It integrates
with our example p2p chat application, and it does so through three different
clients, nwaku, go-waku and js-waku for browsers. This is our first p2p
cross-client testnet for RLN Relay.

Here's a screenshot of a short demo. This shows a user registering in a browser,
signaling through JS-Waku. It then gets relayed to a nwaku node, that verifies
the proof. When more than one message is sent in a given epoch, it detects it as
spam and discards it. Slashing hasn't been implemented fully yet in the client
and is a work in progress.

If you are curious and want to participate, you can join the effort on our [Vac
Discord](https://discord.gg/PQFdubGt6d). We also have
[tutorials](https://github.com/status-im/nwaku/blob/master/docs/tutorial/rln-chat-cross-client.md)
setup for all clients so you can play around with it.

As part of this, and to make it work in multiple different environments, we've
also been developing a new library called Zerokit. I'll talk about this a bit
later.

![Cross-client testnet](/img/building_private_infra_testnet.png)

### Private settlement / Service credentials

Going back to the service network idea, let's talk about service credentials.
The idea behind service credentials and private settlement is to enable two
actors to pay for and provide services without compromising their privacy. We do
not want the payment to create a direct public link between the service provider
and requester.

Recall the Waku service network illustration with adaptive nodes that choose
which protocols they want to run. Many of these protocols aren't very heavy and
just work by default. For example the relay protocol is enabled by default.
Other protocols are much heavier to provide, such as storing historical
messages.

It is desirable to have additional incentives for this, especially for platforms
that aren't community-based where some level of altruism can be assumed (e.g.
Status Communities, or WalletConnect cloud infrastructure).

You have a node Alice that is often offline and wants to consume historical
messages on some specific content topics. You have another node Bob that runs a
server at home where they store historical messages for the last several weeks.
Bob is happy to provide this service for free because he's excited about running
privacy-preserving infrastructure and he's using it himself, but his node is
getting overwhelmed by freeloaders and he feels like he should be paid something
for continuing to provide this service.

Alice deposits some funds in a smart contract which registers it in a tree,
similar to certain other private settlement mechanisms. A fee is taken or
burned. In exchange, she gets a set of tokens or service credentials. When she
wants to do a query with some criteria, she sends this to Bob. Bob responds with
size of response, cost, and receiver address. Alice then sends a proof of
delegation of a service token as a payment. Bob verifies the proof and resolves
the query.

The end result is that Alice has consumed some service from Bob, and Bob has
received payment for this. There's no direct transaction link between Alice and
Bob, and gas fees can be minimized by extending the period before settling on
chain.

This can be complemented with altruistic service provisioning, for example by
splitting the peer pool into two slots, or only providing a few cheap queries
for free.

The service provisioning is general, and can be generalized for any kind of
request/response service provisoning that we want to keep private.

This isn't a perfect solution, but it is an incremental improvement on top of
the status quo. It can be augmented with more advanced techniques such as better
non-repudiable node reputation, proof of correct service provisioning, etc.

We are currently in the raw spec / proof of concept stage of this. We expect to
launch a testnet of this later this year or early next year.

![Service credentials flow](/img/building_private_infra_servicecred.png)

### Zerokit

[Zerokit](https://github.com/vacp2p/zerokit) is a set of Zero Knowledge modules,
written in Rust and designed to be used in many different environments. The
initial goal is to get the best of both worlds with Circom/Solidity/JS and
Rust/ZK ecosystem. This enables people to leverage Circom-based constructs from
non-JS environments.

For the RLN module, it is using Circom circuits via ark-circom and Rust for
scaffolding. It exposes a C FFI API that can be used through other system
programming environments, like Nim and Go. It also exposes an experimental WASM
API that can be used through web browsers.

Waku is p2p infrastructure running in many different environments, such as
Nim/JS/Go/Rust, so this a requirement for us.

Circom and JS strengths are access to Dapp developers, tooling, generating
verification code, circuits etc.  Rust strengths is that it is systems-based and
easy to interface with other language runtime such as Nim, Go, Rust, C. It also
gives access to other Rust ZK ecosystems such as arkworks. This opens door for
using other constructs, such as Halo2. This becomes especially relevant for
constructs where you don't want to do a trusted setup or where circuits are more
complex/custom and performance requirements are higher.

In general with Zerokit, we want to make it easy to build and use ZKP in a
multitude of environments, such as mobile phones and web browsers. Currently it
is too complex to write privacy-protecting infrastructure with ZKPs considering
all the languages and tools you have to learn, from JS, Solidity and Circom to
Rust, WASM and FFI. And that isn't even touching on things like secure key
storage or mobile dev. Luckily more and more projects are working on this,
including writing DSLs etc. It'd also be exciting if we can make a useful
toolstack for JS-less ZK dev to reduce cognitive overhead, similar to what we
have with something like Foundry.

### Other research

I also want to mention a few other things we are doing. One thing is
[protocol specifications](https://rfc.vac.dev/). We think this is very important
for p2p infra, and we see a lot of other projects that claim to do it p2p
infrastructure but they aren't clear about guarantees or how stable something
is. That makes it hard to have multiple implementations, to collaborate across
different projects, and to analyze things objectively.

Related to that is publishing [papers](https://vac.dev/publications). We've put
out three so far, related to Waku and RLN-Relay. This makes it easier to
interface with academia. There's a lot of good researchers out there and we want
to build a better bridge between academia and industry.

Another thing is [network](https://vac.dev/wakuv2-relay-anon)
[privacy](https://github.com/vacp2p/research/issues/107). Waku is modular with
respect to privacy guarantees, and there are a lot of knobs to turn here
depending on specific deployments. For example, if you are running the full
relay protocol you currently have much stronger receiver anonymity than if you
are running filter protocol from a bandwidth or connectivity-restricted node.

We aim to make this pluggable depending on user needs. E.g. mixnets such as Nym
come with some trade-offs but are a useful tool in the arsenal. A good mental
model to keep in mind is the anonymity trilemma, where you can only pick 2/3 out
of low latency, low bandwidth usage and strong anonymity.

We are currently exploring [Dandelion-like
additions](https://github.com/vacp2p/research/issues/119) to the relay/gossip
protocol, which would provide for stronger sender anonymity, especially in a
multi-node/botnet attacker model. As part of this we are looking into different
parameters choices and general possibilities for lower latency usage. This could
make it more amenable for latency sensitive environments, such as validator
privacy, for specific threat models. The general theme here is we want to be
rigorous with the guarantees we provide, under what conditions and for what
threat models.

Another thing mentioned earlier is [Noise payload
encryption](https://vac.dev/wakuv2-noise), and specifically things like allowing
for pairing different devices with e.g. QR codes. This makes it easier for
developers to provide secure messaging in many realistic scenarios in a
multi-device world.

![Other research](/img/building_private_infra_misc.png)

### Summary

We've gone over what privacy-protecting infrastructure is, why we want it and
how we can build it. We've seen how ZK is a fundamental building block for this.
We've looked at Waku, the communication layer for Web3, and how it uses Zero
Knowledge proofs to stay private and function better. We've also looked at
Zerokit and how we can make it easier to do ZKP in different environments.

Finally we also looked at some other research we've been doing. All of the
things mentioned in this article, and more, is available as
[write-ups](https://vac.dev/research), [specs](https://rfc.vac.dev/), or
discussions on our [forum](forum.vac.dev/) or [Github](github.com/vacp2p/).

If you find any of this exciting to work on, feel free to reach out on our
Discord.  We are also [hiring](https://jobs.status.im/), and we have started
expanding into other privacy infrastructure tech like private and provable
computation with ZK-WASM.
