---
layout: post
name:  "How Waku RLN Relay protects against spammers!"
title:  "How Waku RLN Relay protects against spammers!"
date:   2021-02 12:00:00 +0800
author: staheri14
published: true
permalink: /waku-v2-rln-relay
categories: research
summary: A simplified explanation of how Waku RLN Relay mitigates the spamming issue in a p2p manner.
image: 
discuss: 
---

## Introduction

This blog is going to give you an overview of how we enabled spam protection in waku relay through rate-limiting nullifiers or rln for short.

Firstly, let me give a little background about Waku. Waku has a peer-to-peer (p2p) structure, that is, it relies on **No** central server and instead messages get transmitted in the network by users' collaboration. The underlying protocol (as the writeup of this blog) is [GossipSub](https://docs.libp2p.io/concepts/publish-subscribe/). In a very informal way, it is like I send a message to you, you send it to whoever you know, and it goes on till the message reaches its destination. 

### Spam Definition
What does spamming stand for? In a messaging system, spam and spammer can have multiple definitions depending on context e.g., spam can be merely an unsolicited message, or spamming may mean sending an unsolicited message (spam) to large numbers of recipients (in which a large number of the recipients is emphasized). However, in a decentralized p2p system (in specific a p2p system with a GossipSub routing structure), the problem of spamming goes beyond just the recipients of a message and it affects all the peers. This is because the spam messages get routed through the collaboration of all the peers thus consume the resources of the intermediate peers; the system gets congested, and the availability of peers degrades as they get busy spending their computational power/bandwidth/storage capacity on processing spam messages.  

Following the preceding argument, we define a spammer as an entity who uses the messaging system (regardless of the intention) to publish a large number of messages (regardless of the content and the number of recipients) in a short amount of time. The messages issued in this way are called spam. 

### Related Solutions

Has the spamming issue addressed before? Of course yes! Here is an overview of the spam protection techniques with their trade-offs and use-cases

**Centralized Messaging Systems**: In traditional centralized messaging systems e.g., mail servers, spam usually signifies unsolicited messages sent in bulk or messages with malicious content like malware. Protection mechanisms include (but not limited to) authentication through some piece of personal information e.g., phone number, checksum-based filtering (to protect against messages sent in bulk), challenge-response systems, and content filtering (on the server or via a proxy application). These methods exploit the fact that the messaging system is centralized and a global view of the users activities is available based on which spamming patterns can be extracted and defeated accordingly.  Moreover, users are associated with an identifier (username) which provides the server with profiling capability which is against user's anonymity and privacy. 

But what about spam prevention in p2p messaging platforms?  there are the *Proof of Work* technique deployed by Whisper and *Peer scoring* method (namely reputation-based approach) adopted by LibP2P, but each of these solutions has its own shortcomings for real-life use-cases. 

**Proof of work**: The idea behind the proof of work is to make messaging a computationally costly operation hence lowering the messaging rate of **all** the peers including the spammers. This solution does not suit heterogeneous systems with resource-restricted peers who won't be able to carry the designated computation and will be practically excluded from the system. 

**Peer Scoring**: The peer scoring method is to limit the number of messages issued by a peer in connection to another peer. That is, each peer monitors all the peers that is directly connected to and adjusts their messaging quota (i.e., to route or not route their messages) depending on their past activities. e.g., if a peer detects its neighbor is sending more than x messages per month, can drop its quota to z.x where z is less than one (this is only one sample strategy).  One shortcoming of this solution is that scoring is based on peers local observations and the concept of score is defined in relation to one single peer. This leaves room for attack where an attacker can make connections to k peers in the system and publishes k.(x-1)  messages by exploiting al of its k connections. Another attack scenario is through bot nets consisting of a large number of (e.g., a million) bots. The attacker rents a botnet and inserts each of them as a legitimate peer to the network and each can publish x-1 messages per month without being identified as spammer. <!-- Another downside is the possibility of false positive, where the attacker can surround one single peer with some spam peers and make him look like an spammer and cause him get removed by its neighbors. It also exhibits issues around privacy as well as arbitrary exclusion. -->


### Economic-Incentive Spam protection 
But, is it the end of the spam-protection journey!? shall we get along with the spammers! Certainly not, Waku is here to save you!
We brought you a p2p spam-protection method which:
- is **efficient**  and fits the **heterogeneous** network of peers (i.e., no crazy computational, storage, memory, and bandwidth requirement!). 
- respects users privacy (unlike reputation-based and centralized methods)
- deploys economic-incentives to contain spammers' activity. Namely, there is a financial sacrifice for those who want to spam the system. How? follow along ...

We devise a general rule to save everyone's life and that is 

**No one can publish more than N messages per epoch without being financially charged!** 

We set N to 1 for now, but keep in mind, it can be any arbitrary value.
You may be thinking that it is too restrictive! one per epoch!? but don't worry, we set the epoch to a reasonable value so that it does not slow down the communication of innocent users but will make the life of spammers harder! Epoch here can be every second, as defined by UTC date-time +-20s.


The remainder of this blog is all about the story of how to enforce this limit on each user's messaging rate as well as how to impose the financial cost when the limit gets violated.  This brings us to the Rate Limiting Nullifiers and how we integrate this technique into Waku v2 (in specific the `WakuRelay` protocol) to protect our valuable users against spammers.

## Technical Terms

## Economic-Incentive Spam protection through Rate Limiting Nullifiers


The solution embodies the following components:

- Group: We manage all the peers inside a large group (later we can split peers into smaller groups, but for now consider only one). The group management is done via a smart contract which is devised for this purpose and is deployed on the Ethereum network.
- Membership: To be able to send messages and in specific for the published messages to get routed by all the peers, publishing peers have to register to the group. Membership involves setting up public and private key pairs (think of it as the username and password). The private key remains at the user side but the public key becomes a part of the group information on the contract (publicly available) and everyone has access to it. Public keys are not human-generated (like usernames) and instead they are random numbers, as such, they do not reveal any information about the owner (think of public keys as pseudonyms). Registration is mandatory for the users who want to publish a message, however, users who only want to listen to the messages are more than welcome and do not have to register in the group. 
- Membership fee: Membership is not for free! each peer has to lock a certain amount of funds during the registration (this means peers have to have an Ethereum account with sufficient balance for this sake). This fund is safely stored on the contract and remains intact unless the peer attempts to break the rules and publish more than one message per epoch. 
- Zero-knowledge Proof of membership: Do you want your message to get routed to its destination, fine, but you have to prove that you are a member of the group (sorry, no one can escape the registration phase!). Now, you may be thinking that should I attach my public key to my message to prove my membership? Absolutely Not! we said that our solution respects privacy! membership proofs are done in a zero-knowledge manner that is each message will carry cryptographic proof asserting that "the message is generated by one of the current members of the group", so your identity remains private and your anonymity is preserved!
- Proof of not double signaling (Slashing through secret sharing): Till now it does not seem like we are able to catch spammers, right? yes, you are right! now comes the exciting part, detecting spammers and slashing them. The core idea behind the slashing is that each publishing peer (not routing peers!) has to integrate a secret share of its private key inside the message. The secret share is deterministically computed out of the private key and the current epoch. The content of this share is harmless for the peer's privacy (it looks random) unless the peer attempts to publish more than one message in the same epoch hence disclosing more than one secret share of its private key. Indeed two distinct shares of the private key under the same epoch are enough to reconstruct the entire private key. Then what should you do with the recovered private key? hurry up! go to the contract and withdraw the private key and claim its fund and get rich!! Are you thinking what if spammers attach junk values instead of valid secret shares? Of course that wouldn't be cool! so, there is a zero-knowledge proof for this sake where the publishing peer has to prove that the secret shares are generated correctly.
- <!--perhaps you may think can someone fake a proof? how can we make sure that someone is not lying about its shares? well, glad you ask it, but  the soundness property of ZKP takes care of this :D-->
- Merkle Tree  local storage


<!-- To enable protection against spammers, we consider all the users in the network as a large group (later we can split them into smaller groups, but for now consider only one). Thus, users have to register to that group to be able to send messages. A user registers to the group by setting public and private keys (think of it as the username and password). The private key remains at the user side but the public key becomes a part of the group information (publicly available) and everyone has access to it. Public keys are not human-generated (like usernames) and instead they are random numbers, as such, they do not reveal any information about the owner (think of public keys as pseudonyms). 

Registration is mandatory for the users who want to publish a message, however, users who only want to listen to the messages are more than welcome and do not have to register to the group. 


Once a user registers to the group, she can start sending messages conditioned to the rate limit i.e, one message per epoch. To enforce that, each publishing user has to attach **some information** about her public key into the message. As such, if a user attempts to publish more than one message per epoch, all the other users will catch it by looking at the public key information in the published messages. -->
<!-- TODO describe the workflow from a peer's perspective>
<!-- TODO add a figure-->

<!-- TODO talk about the storage requirement, the fee, the running time, the bandwidth-->
## Feasibility and Open Issues

<!--TODO Explain that spammers can still generate more than one account and send more than one message per epoch -->
<!--TODO link to the feasibility issues on gitHub -->

<!-- TODO acknowledge rln group-->

## References
https://github.com/vacp2p/research/issues/44